SIX
Letters on Prayer
We have learned that prayer is the continuation of a conversation that God has started. He started it when he implanted knowledge of himself in every human being, when he spoke through the prophets and in his written Word, and especially when he called us to himself through the Holy Spirit sent into our hearts. We have also explored what could be called a theology of prayer. The character of prayer is determined by the character of the God we are reaching toward. The God to whom Christians pray is a triune God. We can pray because God is our loving Father, because Christ is our mediator giving us access to the throne of the universe, and because the Spirit himself indwells us.
From here on in, we will try to answer the practical questions. How do we actually build on this foundation? In God and the gospel we have the spiritual resources to pray, but how do we actually do it?
We turn first to three of the greatest teachers in the history of the Christian church—St. Augustine, Martin Luther, and John Calvin. Each of them wrote extensively on prayer in many places, but each of them also produced one timeless classic—three “master classes”—on the subject. Augustine and Luther each wrote a personal letter to an individual on how to pray, while Calvin included a magisterial treatment of prayer in his summary of doctrine, the Institutes.159 In this and the following chapters, we will listen to and learn from them.

Augustine on Prayer
Anicia Faltonia Proba (died AD 432) was a Roman noblewoman who was a Christian believer. She had the distinction of knowing Augustine, who was the greatest theologian of the first millennium of Christian history, as well as John Chrysostom, who was its greatest preacher. We have two letters of Augustine to Proba, and the first (Letter 130) is the only writing wholly devoted to the subject of prayer that he ever produced. Proba wrote Augustine because she was afraid she wasn’t praying as she should. Augustine responded with a brief, practical essay.160
Augustine’s first principle is that before you know what to pray for and how to pray for it, you must become a particular kind of person. “You must account yourself ‘desolate’ in this world, however great the prosperity of your lot may be.” The scales must have fallen from your eyes and you must see clearly that no matter how great your earthly circumstances become, they can never bring you the lasting peace, happiness, and consolation that are found in Christ. Unless you have that clearly in view, your prayers may go wrong.
Here again is one of the main themes of Augustine’s theology, applied to prayer. We must see that our heart’s loves are “disordered,” out of order. Things we ought to love third or fourth are first in our hearts. God, whom we should love supremely, is someone we may acknowledge but whose favor and presence is not existentially as important to us as prosperity, success, status, love, and pleasure. Unless at the very least we recognize this heart disorder and realize how much it distorts our lives, our prayers will be part of the problem, not an agent of our healing. For example, if we look to our financial prosperity as our main source of safety and confidence in life, then when our wealth is in grave jeopardy, we will cry out to God for help, but our prayers will be little more than “worrying in God’s direction.” When our prayers are finished we will be more upset and anxious than before. Prayer will not be strengthening. It won’t heal our hearts by reorienting our vision and helping us put things in perspective and bringing us to rest in God as our true security.
Augustine goes on. If you have settled this—if you have grasped the character of your heart and admitted your desolation apart from Christ—then, he says, you can begin to pray. And what should you pray for? With a bit of a smile (I think), he answers that you should pray for what everyone else prays for: “Pray for a happy life.” What, however, will bring you a happy life? If you have embraced Augustine’s first principle of prayer, you have realized that comforts and rewards and pleasures in themselves give only fleeting excitement and that, if you rest your heart in them, they will bring you less enduring happiness. He turns to Psalm 27:4 and points to the psalmist’s great prayer: “One thing have I desired of the Lord, one thing will I seek after: that I may dwell in the house of the Lord to behold the beauty of the Lord.”
This is the fundamental prayer for happiness from a mind that the Spirit has cleared of illusions. Augustine writes: “We love God, therefore, for what He is in Himself, and [we love] ourselves and our neighbors for His sake.” That doesn’t mean, he quickly adds, that we shouldn’t pray for anything else but to know, love, and please God. Not at all. The Lord’s Prayer shows us that we need many things. However, if we have made God our greatest love, and if knowing and pleasing him is our highest pleasure, it transforms both what and how we pray for a happy life.
Augustine then cites Proverbs 30:7–9 as an example: “Give me neither poverty nor riches: Feed me with food appropriate for me lest I be full and deny you … or lest I be poor, and steal and take the name of my God in vain.” This is an excellent test. Consider the petition “O Lord—give me a job so I won’t be poor.” That is an appropriate thing to ask God for. Indeed, it is essentially the same thing as to pray, “Give us this day our daily bread.” Yet the Proverbs 30 prayer reveals the only proper motivation beneath the request. If you just jump into prayer without recognizing the disordered nature of the heart’s loves, your prayer’s intention will be, “Make me as wealthy as possible.” The Proverbs 30 prayer is different. It is to ask, “Lord, meet my material needs, and give me wealth, yes, but only as much as I can handle without it harming my ability to put you first in life. Because ultimately I don’t need status and comfort—I need you as my Lord.”
Imagine an eight-year-old boy playing with a toy truck and then it breaks. He is disconsolate and cries out to his parents to fix it. Yet as he’s crying, his father says to him, “A distant relative you’ve never met has just died and left you one hundred million dollars.” What will the child’s reaction be? He will just cry louder until his truck is fixed. He does not have enough cognitive capacity to realize his true condition and be consoled. In the same way, Christians lack the spiritual capacity to realize all we have in Jesus. This is the reason Paul prays that God would give Christians the spiritual ability to grasp the height, depth, breadth, and length of Christ’s salvation (Eph 3:16–19; Eph 1:17–18). In general, our lack of joy is as Shakespeare wrote: “The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves” (Julius Caesar, Act 1, Scene 2). We are like the eight-year-old boy who rests his happiness in his “stars”—his circumstances—rather than recognizing what we have in Christ. This is why in the Lord’s Prayer we don’t get to the petition for our daily bread and needs until we have spent time remembering the greatness of God and reigniting our love for him. Only then can we pray rightly for happiness and for our needs.
Augustine’s third directive is both comprehensive and practical, and we have already alluded to it. Once you have learned to pray in full awareness of the disorderedness of your heart and where true joys are found, he says, you can be guided in the specifics of how to pray by studying the Lord’s Prayer. Look at all the kinds of prayer in it—adoration, petition, thanksgiving, confession. Look at the order and form of the petitions. Think long and hard about this great model of prayer and be sure your own appeals fit it. For example, Augustine writes: He who says in prayer … “Give me as much wealth as you have given to this or that man” or “Increase my honors; make me eminent in power and fame in the world,” and who asks merely from a desire for these things, and not in order through them to benefit men agreeably to God’s will, I do not think he will find any part of the Lord’s Prayer in connection with which he could fit in these requests. Therefore let us be ashamed to ask these things.161 Augustine’s fourth principle is about prayer in the dark times. He admits that even after following the first three rules, “we [still] know not what to pray for as we ought in regard to tribulations.” Even the most godly Christians can’t be sure what to ask for when we are enmeshed in difficulties and suffering. “Tribulations … may do us good … and yet because they are hard and painful … we pray … that they may be removed from us.” Should we pray, then, for a change in circumstances or just for strength to endure them? Augustine points to Jesus’ own prayer in Gethsemane, which was perfectly balanced between honest desire—“let this cup pass from me”—and submission to God—“nevertheless, not my will but thine be done.” He points also to Romans 8:26, which promises that the Spirit will guide our hearts and prayers when we are groaning and confused—and God will hear them even in their imperfect state. So, Augustine concludes, pour out your heart’s desire, but remember the wisdom and goodness of God as you do so.
Anicia Proba was a widow by her early thirties and was present when Rome was sacked in 410. She had to flee for her life to Africa with her granddaughter Demetrias, where they met Augustine. Her former life had been upended, and from what we know about her from the historical record, she never again enjoyed the secure life she had previously known. Augustine, however, argues not only that we can grow in prayer in spite of these difficulties but because of them. He concludes the letter by asking his friend, “Now what makes this work [of prayer] specially suitable to widows but their bereaved and desolate condition?” Should a widow not, he asked, “commit her widowhood, so to speak, to her God as her shield in continual and most fervent prayer?” What a remarkable statement. Her sufferings were her “shield”—they defended her from the illusions of self-sufficiency and blindness that harden the heart, and they opened the way for the rich, passionate prayer life that could bring peace in any circumstance. He calls her to embrace her situation and learn to pray. There is every reason to believe she accepted his invitation.162

Martin Luther’s “A Simple Way to Pray”
Martin Luther’s most famous writing on prayer was also in the form of a letter to a friend. Luther was an extraordinary man of prayer himself. Veit Dietrich, one of Luther’s friends, wrote: “There is not a day on which he does not devote at least three hours, the very ones most suitable for [work], to prayer. Once I was fortunate to overhear his prayer. Good God, what faith in his words! He speaks with the great reverence of one who speaks to his God, and with the trust and hope of one who speaks with his father and friend.”163
Peter Beskendorf was the barber who shaved Luther and cut his hair. One day Peter asked Luther to give him a simple way to pray. Peter was a devout though flawed man. While intoxicated at a family meal, he stabbed his own son-in-law to death. Partly through Luther’s intervention Peter was exiled rather than executed, but he endured difficult final years. However, he took with him one of the great texts on the subject of prayer in all of Christian history. Luther gave Peter a rich but practical set of guidelines for prayer.
To begin with, Luther counsels the cultivation of prayer as a habit through regular discipline. He proposes praying twice daily. “It is a good thing to let prayer be the first business of the morning and the last at night. Guard yourselves against those false, deluding ideas which tell you, ‘Wait a little while. I will pray in an hour; first I must attend to this or that.’”164 Luther is no romantic. He concludes, “We are as strictly and solemnly commanded to pray as in the others … not to kill, not to steal, etc.”165 We must pray whether we feel like it or not.
Next, Luther proposes ways to focus our thoughts and to warm and engage our affections for prayer. This is a balancing truth to that of prayer as a duty. Yes, we should pray regardless of feelings, and yet we should do everything we can to engage and warm our hearts, because prayer is a lifting of the heart to God (Lam 3:41).166 It is wrong, he writes, that believers should be “cool and joyless in prayer,” and therefore Luther proposes a preparation for prayer. He advises what he calls “recitation to yourself” of some part of the Scripture such as “the Ten Commandments [or] the words of Christ, etc.”167 This recitation is a form of meditation (or “contemplation,” as Luther calls it) of the Scripture, but it is not mere Bible study. It is taking words of the Scripture and pondering them in such a way that your thoughts and feelings converge on God. By this practice, he says, “I want your heart to be stirred and guided … rightly warmed and inclined toward prayer.” This meditation on the Word is then a kind of bridge as you move from a more formal study of the Bible to prayer.168

The Skill of Meditation
After advising meditation, Luther describes how to do it. He uses the metaphor of a garland. “I divide each [biblical] command into four parts, thereby fashioning a garland of four strands. That is I think of each commandment as first, instruction, which is really what it is intended to be, and consider what the Lord God demands of me so earnestly. Second, I turn it into a thanksgiving; third, a confession; and fourth, a prayer.”169 This turns every biblical text into “a school text, a song book, a penitential book, and prayer book.” How does this work?
First, we are to discern the “instruction” of a text. That means we must distill its essential content, what the passage wants us to believe or do. This is the work of interpreting the biblical passage. Luther calls it the “school text” part of meditation. Obviously, this could be the work of a few seconds if you have already studied text in the past and have come to understand the teaching of the verse. Then you can simply summarize it and use that summary for the rest of the meditation. However, if you don’t understand the text, you can’t really meditate on it. For example, if you are meditating on the Ten Commandments, and you come to the second commandment and you are not sure what “taking God’s name in vain” means, you will have to study that and settle it in your mind before you can summarize it and meditate on it.
Once we have drawn out the “instruction”—put the teaching of the text in a nutshell—then we ask how this teaching particularly leads us to praise and thank God, how it leads us to repent and confess sin, and how it prompts us to appeal to God in petition and supplication. For example, if we ponder the very beginning of the Lord’s Prayer—“Our Father”—it could work like this: As instruction, it shows us that we cannot know God only on our own but must do so in community with others. Jesus did not teach us to pray “my father” but “our father.” We may go on to praise God for all the friends who have helped us in our spiritual journey and for being a God who creates community and bonds of love. We may go on to confess that we do not pray much with others and do not allow our friends to hold us accountable on the consistency of our Christian walk. Finally, we may begin to pray for more close friends with whom we can share our walk of faith. These, of course, are only three out of many possible implications, applications, and reflections of the text.
Luther is teaching us how to generate a small but rich spectrum of insights that can be immediately lifted to God as prayer. Those who have practiced this particular discipline of meditation know that as it proceeds it creates its own energy. It ingeniously forces you off the theoretical plane to consider what that biblical truth you are pondering should actually do to you and in you—how it should lead you to praise God, to repent and change your heart, and also what it should lead you to do in the world. Sometimes the insights that are gained are very striking and moving, and you find yourself spontaneously moving to prayer. Over time this meditative habit of mind will often exert itself during the day, naturally turning your heart toward God. You may find many things you hear, see, and read spontaneously leading you to repent, and to praise and petition God. It helps you to habitually put God into every picture, seasoning your feelings and thoughts, lifting you up when disappointed, and humbling you when successful.
Luther gives brief yet full examples of how he meditates on each of the Ten Commandments. Here is an example of a meditation on the first commandment: “I am the Lord your God, etc. You shall have no other gods before me,” etc. Here I earnestly consider that … my heart must not build upon anything else or trust in any other thing, be it wealth, prestige, wisdom, might, piety, or anything else. Second, I give thanks for his infinite compassion by which he has come to me in such a fatherly way and, unasked, unbidden, and unmerited, has offered to be my God, to care for me, and to be my comfort, guardian, help, and strength in every time of need. … Third, I confess … for having fearfully provoked his wrath by countless acts of idolatry. I repent of these and ask for his grace. Fourth, I pray … preserve my heart so that I shall never again become forgetful and ungrateful, that I may never seek after other gods or other consolation on earth or in any creature, but cling truly and solely to thee, my only God.170 Notice how Luther works out the truth of the text as it affects his relationship to God, to himself, and to the world. The meditations he records are blends of discursive thinking and personal address. They are not exactly Bible study, yet not exactly prayer. They are thinking in the presence of God—meditation. They are ways of inclining and preparing the heart for prayer by fully using the mind and taking the Scripture with utmost seriousness—all at the same time.

# Spiritual “Riffing” on the Lord’s Prayer
After meditation, do we launch into prayer? We could do that, yes, but Luther shares one more exercise that he does before praying free-form about the things on his heart. Luther suggests that after meditating on the Scripture, you should pray through each petition of the Lord’s Prayer, paraphrasing and personalizing each one using your own needs and concerns.
He gives a personal example of how he would pray each petition. The prayers he conveys are something like musical riffs—improvisations on a theme. “‘Give us … our daily bread,’” he says, and then immediately adds, “I commend to thee my house and property, wife and child. Grant that I can manage them well, supporting and educating them.”171 He is adamant that readers of his essay not recite the actual words Luther himself pens, lest it be “nothing but idle chatter and prattle, read word for word out of a book.” That would defeat the purpose of the exercise. Indeed, Luther says that he himself would not be paraphrasing the Lord’s Prayer the same way the following day. “I do not bind myself to such words or syllables, but say my prayers in one fashion today, in another tomorrow, depending on my mood and feeling.”172 He insists that the persons praying should personalize each section, putting their own needs and aspirations into their own words.
The value of this exercise is manifold. It addresses one of the great practical difficulties of prayer—distracting thoughts. We turn from planning for an event to beginning to pray and find we are still thinking about the event. Ordinary prayer, which is either completely extempore or based on a list of prayer needs, often cannot draw the mind’s attention fully away from what occupied it previously. The exercise of elaborating on the Lord’s Prayer commands the full mental faculty, and this helps greatly with the problem of giving God full attention.
Also, praying the Great Prayer forces us to use all the full language and basic forms of prayer. If left to ourselves we are likely to pray only about the items that most trouble us at the moment. The petitions “hallowed be thy name” and “thy kingdom come” lead us to pray for the progress of the gospel in our community and society and relationships. “Thy will be done” presses us to accept some things that God has allowed that are troubling us. “Forgive us our debts” brings us to list our most recent sins and failings, while “as we forgive our debtors” forces us to ask ourselves about our resentments and grudges. Praying the Lord’s Prayer forces us to look for things to thank and praise God for in our dark times, and it presses us to repent and seek forgiveness during times of prosperity and success. It disciplines us to bring every part of our lives to God.
Finally, praying the Lord’s Prayer, unlike meditation on a passage of Scripture, is actual prayer. It is address to God—with the authority of Jesus’ own words. It brings boldness and comfort and, of course, warms up the heart to slide right into the most passionate prayer for our most urgent concerns.
This exercise is not burdensomely time-consuming. It often takes only about two to three minutes, though as we will see in a moment, this prayer could “catch fire” and last quite a long time.173
To summarize this point—Luther says we should start with meditation on a text we have previously studied, then after praising and confessing in accordance with our meditation, we should paraphrase the Lord’s Prayer to God. Finally, we should just pray from the heart. This full exercise, he adds, should be done twice a day.

# The Preaching of the Holy Spirit
Luther gives one more piece of advice. It is not another “step” or practice to go along with the others but rather something to be kept in mind while going through all prayer and meditation. He calls praying believers to essentially keep a lookout for the Holy Spirit. If, as we are meditating or praying, “an abundance of good thoughts comes to us, we ought to disregard the other petitions, make room for such thoughts, listen in silence, and under no circumstances obstruct them. The Holy Spirit himself preaches here, and one word of his sermon is better than a thousand of our prayers. Many times I have learned more from one prayer than I might have learned from much reading and speculation.”174 This principle is important enough to be repeated. Again he writes, “If in the midst of such thoughts the Holy Spirit begins to preach in your heart with rich, enlightening thoughts, honor him by letting go of this written scheme. … Remember what he says and note it well and you will behold wondrous things in the law of God” (Ps 119:18).175
The balance here is noteworthy and rarely found in other works on prayer. Luther expects that we will hear God speak through his Word. Luther will not make the same mistake as George Whitefield, assuming that his inner impressions are revelations from God. God’s communication to us is in the Scripture. That does not mean, however, that meditation is merely an exercise of the mind. He expects that the Spirit, as we reflect on the biblical truth before God, will sometimes fill our heart with rich thoughts and ideas that feel poignant and new to us, even when we are thinking about a text or truth that we have heard hundreds of times before. Luther is talking about the eyes of our hearts being enlightened (Eph 1:18) so that things we know with the mind become more fully rooted in our beings’ core.
Of course, Luther believed that all prayer to our Father is enabled by the Spirit of adoption through the mediation of Jesus, the True Son. No prayer, then, happens without the work of the Spirit. Nevertheless, Luther came to see that the Spirit may particularly illumine our minds and assures our hearts with God’s reality, as Paul hints in texts such as Romans 5:5 and 8:15–16.
To paraphrase Luther’s little treatise—he tells us to build on our study of the Scripture through meditation, answering the Word in prayer to the Lord. As we do that, we should be aware that the Holy Spirit may begin “preaching” to us. When that happens, we must drop our routines and pay close attention.



# Rules for Prayer
Our third “master class” on prayer is found in John Calvin’s Institutes of the Christian Religion. Perhaps the most distinct part of Calvin’s treatment is what he calls “the rules for prayer.”
The Joyful Fear
Calvin’s first rule for prayer is the principle of reverence or the “fear of God.” Calvin calls Christians first of all to have a due sense of the seriousness and magnitude of what prayer is. It is a personal audience and conversation with the Almighty God of the universe. There is nothing worse than to be “devoid of awe.”176 We must instead come to prayer “so moved by God’s majesty” that we are “freed from earthly cares and affections.” Here, Calvin is touching on one of the most misunderstood yet important concepts in the Bible—the “fear of God.” The fear of God obviously means to be afraid, but afraid of what—and why?
It is natural to think that the fear of God means to be afraid he is going to punish us. 1 John 4:18, however, tells us that “perfect love drives out fear” and adds that the kind of fear it drives out has “to do with punishment.” Romans 8:1 teaches that there is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. From this we conclude that a Christian’s fear of God can’t mean we are constantly afraid of being spiritually lost if we don’t live just right. Other texts, like the surprising Psalm 130:4, says that the experience of forgiveness actually increases the fear of God.
What, then, should a Christian be afraid of regarding God? Think of it like this. Imagine that you suddenly are introduced to some person you have always admired enormously—perhaps someone you have hero-worshipped. You reach out to shake her hand and suddenly it hits you. You can’t believe you are actually meeting her. You discover to your embarrassment that you are trembling and sweating, and when you try to speak, you are out of breath. What is going on? You are not afraid of being hurt, or punished. Rather, you are genuinely afraid of doing something stupid or saying something that is inappropriate to the person and the occasion. Your joyful admiration has a fearful aspect to it. You are in awe, and therefore you don’t want to mess up.
That is something we experience even in the presence of an admirable human being. How much more is this a proper response to God. In Kenneth Grahame’s classic The Wind in the Willows, there is a chapter, “The Piper at the Gates of Dawn,” in which the characters Mole and Rat meet the animals’ deity, the god Pan, and hear him playing his pipes. They are stunned: “Rat,” he found breath to whisper, shaking. “Are you afraid?”
“Afraid?” murmured the Rat, his eyes shining with unutterable love. “Afraid! Of Him? O, never, never! And yet—and yet—O, Mole, I am afraid!”177 That captures the concept of the “fear of God” as well as anything I know. We could say that fear of punishment is a self-absorbed kind of fear. It happens to people wrapped up in themselves. Those who believe the gospel—who believe that they are the recipients of undeserved but unshakable grace—grow in a paradoxically loving yet joyful fear. Because of unutterable love and joy in God, we tremble with the privilege of being in his presence and with an intense longing to honor him when we are there. We are deeply afraid of grieving him. To put it another way—you would be quite afraid if someone put a beautiful, priceless, ancient Ming dynasty vase in your hands. You wouldn’t be trembling with fear about the vase hurting you but about your hurting it. Of course, we can’t really harm God, but a Christian should be intensely concerned not to grieve or dishonor the one who is so glorious and who did so much for us.
Calvin says that this sense of awe is a crucial part of prayer. Prayer both requires it and produces it. The very fact that we have access to God’s attention and presence should concentrate the thoughts and elevate the heart.


# Spiritual Insufficiency

Calvin's second rule for prayer is "the sense of need that excludes all unreality." Calvin is here referring to what could be called "spiritual humility." It includes both a strong sense of dependence on God, in general, and a readiness to recognize and repent our own faults in particular. Calvin warned against the common medieval (and modern) view that prayer was a way of putting on your best spiritual clothes, as it were, to impress God with your devoutness. He completely rejects the idea that God could be "appeased by devotions" or that He would hear prayers for "the sake of mere performance." In fact, those who would pray fruitfully must come with an attitude that is exactly the opposite. We must be ruthlessly honest about our flaws and weaknesses. We do all we can to avoid the "unreality" of putting on our best face. We should come to God knowing our only hope is in His grace and forgiveness and being honest about our doubts, fears, and emptiness. We should come to God with the "disposition of a beggar."

Like the call for the "fear of God," this rule also can sound harsh to modern ears, but it need not. Calvin is simply telling us to drop all pretense, to flee from all phoniness. One author, Francis Spufford, using very contemporary idiom, calls for the same thing in this way. When discussing our sinfulness, he says:

"What we're talking about here is not just our tendency to lurch and stumble and screw up by accident, our passive role as agents of entropy. It's our active inclination to break stuff, 'stuff' here including... promises, relationships we care about and our own well-being and other people's... [You are] a being whose wants make no sense, don't harmonize: whose desires deep down are discordantly arranged, so that you truly want to possess and you truly want not to at the very same time. You're equipped, you realize, more for farce (or even tragedy) than happy endings... You're human, and that's where we live; that's our normal experience."

Until we fully acknowledge the chaos within us that the Bible calls sin, we live in what Calvin calls "unreality." Counselors will tell you that the only character flaws that can really destroy you are the ones you won't admit. Crucial to true prayer, then, is confession and repentance. Again, prayer both requires and produces this humility. Prayer brings you into God's presence, where our shortcomings are exposed. Then the new awareness of insufficiency drives us to seek God even more intensely for forgiveness and help. Calvin writes: "Those who seek Him with all their heart will find Him (Jer 29:13–14). ... Lawful prayer, therefore, demands repentance." If you are smug, blaming others for your problems rather than taking responsibility for what you have done wrong, you will not be seeking God with all your heart. Prayer both requires and empowers the abandonment of self-justification, blame shifting, self-pity, and spiritual pride.

To the degree you can shed the "unreality" of self-sufficiency, to that degree your prayer life will become richer and deeper.

# Restful Trust yet Confident Hope

Calvin's third and fourth rules for prayer should be paired and considered together. His third rule is that we should have a submissive trust of God. "Anyone who stands before God to pray ... [must] abandon all thoughts of his own glory." We are to trust in Him even when things are not going as we wish them to go. This was Jesus' "law" for prayer too, because all who pray must say, "Thy will be done." One of the purposes of prayer is to bring our hearts to trust in His wisdom, not in our own. It is to say, "Here's what I need—but You know best." It is to leave all our needs and desires in His hands in a way that is possible only through prayer. That transaction brings a comfort and rest that nothing else can bring.

And yet, the fourth rule is just as crucial and must be kept beside the third. We are to pray with confidence and hope. Calvin writes, "[Though] cast down and overcome by true humility, we should be nonetheless encouraged to pray by a sure hope that our prayer will be answered." He immediately acknowledges that "these are indeed things apparently contradictory." Then he goes on to argue why the contradiction is only apparent, not real.

If God's will is always right, and submission to it is so important, why pray for anything with fervor and confidence? Calvin lists the reasons. God invites us to do so and promises to answer prayers—because He is good and our loving heavenly Father. Also, God often waits to give a blessing until you have prayed for it. Why? Good things that we do not ask for will usually be interpreted by our hearts as the fruit of our own wisdom and diligence. Gifts from God that are not acknowledged as such are deadly to the soul, because they thicken the illusion of self-sufficiency that leads to overconfidence and sets us up for failure.

Finally, Calvin argues that these two balancing truths are not only not contradictory but are complementary. On the one hand, we know that we "have not because we ask not" (James 4:2). There are many goods that God will not give us unless we honor Him and make our hearts safe to receive them through prayer. But on the other hand—what thoughtful persons, knowing the limits of their own wisdom, would dare to pray if they thought God would invariably give them their wishes? Endless stories of genies, lamps, and wishes illustrate the almost clichéd truth that our desires are, as we have seen, "discordantly arranged" and often fatally unwise. However, there is nothing to fear. God will not give us anything contrary to His will, and that will always include what is best for us in the long run (Rom 8:28). We can, therefore, pray confidently because He won't give us everything we want. "He so tempers the outcome of events according to His incomprehensible plan that the prayers of the saints, which are a mixture of faith and error, are not nullified."

If we hold Calvin's third and fourth rules together, it creates enormous incentive to pray. "Ask and you shall receive" (Matt 7:7–8)—Ask with confidence and hope. Don't be afraid that you will ask for the wrong thing. Of course you will! God "tempers the outcome" with His incomprehensible wisdom. Cry, ask, and appeal—you will get many answers. Finally, where you do not get an answer, or where the answer is not what you want, use prayer to enable you to rest in His will.


# The Rule against Rules

After Calvin expounded his four rules for prayer, he added an extended “coda” so significant that most readers understand it as a fifth rule.

The fifth rule is actually a major qualification of the very word rule. He says: “What I have set forth on the four rules of right praying is not so rigorously required that God will reject those prayers in which He finds neither perfect faith nor repentance, together with a warmth of zeal and petitions rightly conceived.” Although this sounds like backpedaling, it isn’t. “No one has ever carried out [prayer] with the uprightness that was due. ... Without this mercy there would be no freedom to pray.” Calvin’s fifth rule is the rule of grace. He urges us to not conclude that following any set of rules could make our prayers worthy to be heard. Nothing we formulate or do can qualify us for access to God. Only grace can do that—based not on our performance but on the saving work of Christ.

What, then, is the function of "rules"? Why does it matter how we pray if it’s all by grace? The answer is that prayer should be shaped by and in accord with that grace. The joyful fear, the helplessness yet confidence, are all ways of approaching God that are possible only if our access is not earned but is received as a gift. Only when we see we cannot keep the rules, and need God's mercy, can we become people who begin to keep the rules. The rules do not earn or merit God's attention but rather align our prayers with who God is—the God of free grace—and thereby unite us to Him more and more.

Here is an illustration that might help us think about this. When you flick the light switch, the bulbs illuminate. Does the light switch provide the power for the bulbs? No—that comes from the electricity. The switch has no power in itself, but rather it connects the bulbs to the power. In the same way, our prayers have no virtue to procure us access to the Father. Christ has done that. Prayers that are in accord with a gracious God, however, can connect us to Him. If we pray without humility—if we pray filled with demanding impatience—it cuts us off from Him. If instead we pray without any confidence or hope of being heard, that also blocks any sense of His presence. Both of these mistakes are failures to pray in Jesus’ name, to come to God on the basis of undeserved mercy. Calvin says this in a passage that has set the course for Christian understanding of prayer for centuries.

For as soon as God's dread majesty comes to mind, we cannot but tremble and be driven far away by the recognition of our own unworthiness, until Christ comes forward as intermediary, to change the throne of dreadful glory into the throne of grace. "Hitherto," He says, "you have asked nothing in my name; ask and you will receive" [John 16:24] ... as Paul says, "All God's promises find their yea and amen in Him" [2 Cor 1:20]. That is, they are confirmed and fulfilled.

Praying in Jesus’ name, then, is not a magic formula. We must not think it means that only if we literally enunciate the words “in Jesus’ name” will our prayers be answered. As we have seen, God can hear and answer the prayers of anyone, even those who do not pray with faith in Jesus. God often hears and answers the cries of the oppressed poor even when they are praying to a false god, Calvin argues, pointing to passages in the Bible that teach this. This is simply because He is a merciful God. So "in Jesus’ name" is not a magical incantation.

To pray in Jesus’ name means to come to God in prayer consciously trusting in Christ for our salvation and acceptance and not relying on our own credibility or record. It is, essentially, to reground our relationship with God in the saving work of Jesus over and over again. It also means to recognize your status as a child of God, regardless of your inner state. God our Father is committed to His children’s good, as any good father would be.


# Jesus’ Claims on the Father

Why are we always heard for Jesus’ sake? Australian theologian Graeme Goldsworthy traces out how, ever since Adam was expelled from the family, God has promised to make us His children again. God called the nation of Israel “my firstborn son” (Ex 4:22–23) and called His son out of Egypt through the Exodus (Hos 11:1). He named the anointed kings of Israel—David and Solomon—to be His sons. Nevertheless, the history of Israel and of Israel's kings was one of failure to trust and obey God and truly be His sons. At Jesus’ baptism, however, God speaks from heaven: “You are my Son, whom I love; with you I am well pleased” (Luke 3:22). As Goldsworthy says, “One can almost hear heaven sigh with relief,” for here, finally and at last, is a true Son, one who can and will perfectly trust, obey, and please His Father.

Therefore, to Him—and to Him alone among all the human beings of the earth—does the privilege of prayer and access belong. He is the only one who can say with confidence to God, “I knew that you always hear me” (John 11:41–42). When we believe in Jesus Christ we are united to Him. We are “in Him,” as Paul says repeatedly. This means that what is true of Jesus is true of us. Because He has the perfect and secure access of an obedient child to the Father, so now do we. “If the Father always hears the Son, then He always hears those who, in Christ, are His sons.” When we pray in Jesus’ name, therefore, we do so with supreme confidence and yet humble dependence on unmerited grace.

The American preacher R. A. Torrey tells about a man he met when Torrey was preaching in Melbourne, Australia. One day as he was on the platform getting ready to speak, he was given an anonymous note. It was an appeal to address the problem of unanswered prayer in his sermon. The note read:

Dear Dr. Torrey: I am in great perplexity. I have been praying for a long time for something that I am confident is according to God’s will, but I do not get it. I have been a member of the Presbyterian Church for thirty years, and I have tried to be a consistent one all the time. I have been Superintendent in the Sunday school for twenty-five years, and an elder in the church for twenty years; and yet God does not answer my prayer and I cannot understand it. Can you explain it to me?

Torrey recognized the subtext of the argument and took a plunge. He walked to the podium, read the note, and used it to make a crucial point. He said that the problem was not hard to see. “This man thinks that because he has been a consistent church member for thirty years, a faithful Sunday school superintendent for twenty-five years, and an elder in the church for twenty years, that God is under obligation to answer his prayer. He is really praying in his own name.” Doubtlessly, the man would have been dutifully intoning “in Jesus’ name” at the end of each prayer, but only as part of his project to procure God’s favor through perfect compliance with all the rules. “We must,” Torrey continued, “...give up any thought that we have any claims upon God. ... But Jesus Christ has great claims on God, and we should go to God in our prayers not on the ground of any goodness in ourselves, but on the ground of Jesus Christ's claims.” After the close of the meeting, the writer of the note approached Torrey and revealed himself. “You have hit the nail on the head,” he said.



